---
title: Netoworking 101
date: 2020-12-26 23:17:11
---

### Ports
[watch here](https://youtu.be/g2fT-g9PX9o)

It is not a physical connection, it is a logical connection.
It determines which service on a computer or service is going to be used, whether HTTP, HTTPS, FTP.

Numbers range from `0-65535`

#### Used on server
Ports our server connects to
1. Well known ports `0-1023` 
> - HTTP- port 80
> - HTTPS- port 443
> - FTP- port 21
> - SMTP(Email)- port 25

2. Registered ports `1024-49151` 

### Used on client

Its what our computer assigns itself during a session

- Dynamic/private ports  `49152-65535`  

Port number is always associated with an IP address
they both work together to exchange data on a network.

### IP address

IP address determines the geographic location of the server.

> IP address = network address + host address

Subnet mask reveals how many bits are used for network portion of IP

ex: subnet mask is 255.255.255.0

Then these IPs are on the same network
- 192.168.0.2
- 192.168.0.3
- 192.168.0.4

### Subnetting

Networks are broken down by subnetting and physically  separated using routers.
Subnetting is done by changing default subnet mask by borrowing some bits from the host portion.

> 11111111.11111111.11111111.00000000
> - 1 network with 254 host (256-2 all 0s and all 1s)

> 11111111.11111111.11111111.11000000
> - 4 networks with 62 host

### Default gateway

Default gateway forwards data from 1 network to another. 
- An ARP broadcast is sent to find the MAC address of some computer on the same network
- Once MAC address is exchanged communication can take place

ARP broadcast cannot go past routers.
So to communicate with machine on another network, we ask for MAC of router and not the machine directly.

Networks are broken down by subnetting and physically  separated using routers.

### Application Layer Protocols

HTTP sends data as clear text.

HTTPS encrypts the data

HTTPS protects data by using SSL protocol- It uses public key encryption to secure data.
An SSL certificate is used to authenticate the identity of the website by the browser connecting to a website that uses SSL
Browser checks to see if it trusts the certificate
then server sends an ACK for SSL session to proceed

The other protocol is TLS protocol or Transport Layer Security, successor to SSL.
It also authenticates the server, client and encrypts data.


UDP is connectionless. Fire and forget protocol. Less overhead of data delivery so faster.

FTP protocol is used to transfer files over a network.
Standard protocol to transfer files between computer and server over a network.
FTP is connection oriented protocol that uses TCP for file transfer and guarantee file delivery.

FTPS is FTP over TLS

SFTP is SSH FTP